So, how did they ponzi it?
How did Nirav Modi, Mehul Choksi and some
rogue bankers take PNB for the mother of all rides?
OMKAR GOSWAMI
EVER SINCE THE Punjab National Bank(PNB)
scam broke, we have been treated to a stream
ofincredulous pieces of information. Here's
a sample.
First, that the mama-bhanja duo of Me-
hul Choksi and Nirav Modi used the services
ofa deputy manager, Gokulnath Shetty, and
some other crooked junior employees of
PNB's Brady House branch in Fort Mumbai,
allegedly operating by themselves from little
cubby holes, to defraud the bank of Rs 11,397
crore.Second. Shetty repeatedly issued fraud
banking instruments called Letters of
Undertaking (LoU) in favour of Modi's and
Choksi's firms,which allowed correspondent
Indian bank branches abroad to pay for their
diamond imports. Third, contrary to all rota-
tional practices, Shetty remained at the same
critical post for seven years.
That's notall. Fourth, most of these LoU-
based transactions occurred outside PNB's
core banking system (CBS), which tracks
every debit and credit forall PNB accounts
across the globe and reconciles these on a
daily basis. Fifth, none ofthe correspondent
bank branches abroad appear to have offi-
cially acknowledged PNB’s LoUs that they
were honouring. And if they did, these doc-
uments disappeared in some Brady House
rabbit warren. Sixth neither PNB nor the cor-
respondent banks ever smelt a rat. This is
strange Diamond trade financing is a dicey
business - with PNB itself having earlier suf-
fered a large scandal involving Winsome
Diamonds, whose promoter. Jatin Mehta, es-
caped to becomea citizen ofabalmyand eth-
ical Caribbean island called St Kitts and Nevis.
And, last of all, the fraud came to light af-
ter Shetty had retired. A foolish man from a
Modi firm went to Shetty's successor to ask
fora fresh LoU without any cash margin,
claiming that it was never needed in thepast.
No commentator can yet claim to know
all the“real facts" of this scandal. Instead, let
me pose some uncomfortable questions.
An LoU is a good place to start It isa per-
fectly sound instrument through which a
bank(PNB, Brady House), on behalf of a cus-
tomer(a Modi firm),undertakes to honour a
payment made by another 

bank (say Allahabad Bank's branch in Hong
PNB was one of the first
public sector banks to
implement full-fledged
computerisation which
included the CBS. Brady
House's SWIFT system was
delinked with PNB's CBS.
Was this do me manually by
Shetty? Or is there no link
whatsoever between all PNB
originating SWIFT
transactions and its CBS?
The former is the act of a
rogue; the latter the making
of a systemic catastrophe.
Kong) for imports by its client.Subject to an
LoU's financial limits, the overseas bank of-
fers short term buyer's credit to the importer,
usually for 30 to 90 days. For any LoU, the is-
suing bank earns a fee: the overseas bank
earns interest which is LIBOR plus a spread;
and the importer accesses significantly
cheaper overseas credit.
No problems up to here. Now start the
uncomfortable questions
Why were these LoUs repeatedly issued
without any margin money? Moreover, any
LoU sent to an overseas bank is automatically
acknowledged. How could these acknowl-
edgements disappear?
Now to SWIFT. Globally, inter-bank in-
structions for financial transactions are trans-
mitted through SWIFT, a messaging system
that requires a clear setof codes.Any SWIFT
message must be vetted by three different
people in the sending bank: A maker who
keys in the message, a checkerand a verifier
- the last doing the transmitting after being
satisfied that everything is in order. How
could Shetty blithely use other people's lo-
gin identities and passwords for seven long
years to show that these SWIFT messages in-
volving increasingly larger amounts were ex-
ecuted as prescribed?
PNB was one of the first public sector ba-
nks to implement full-fledged computerisa-
tion which included the CBS. Brady House's
SWIFTsystem was delinked with PN B's CBS.
Was this done manually by Shetty? Or is
there no link whatsoever between all PNB
originating SWIFT trans actions and its CBS?
The former is the act ofa rogue; thelatter the
making of a systemic catastrophe.
On to nostro accounts. Italian for "ours",
nostro signifies “our bank's money held in
another bank". When an overseas SWIFT
transaction occurs, the 
 for-
eign currency amount is put into a nostro ac-
count,which is automatically acknowledged
by the overseas bank The counterpart over-
seas bank is supposed to send a SWIFT mes-
sage confirming the amount in the nostroac-
count How can PNB, Brady House, have no
records of these nostros?
After the overseas bank offered buyer's
credit to pay the supplier abroad for the
sparklers imported by Nirav Modi, it should
have debited the 
 amount
from the nostro account, and informed PNB,
Brady House, ofthe final position against the

 LoU, Where are these docu-
ments? Why were these not eventually re-
flected in PNB's CBS?
If Nirav Modi paid in full on the duedate
against every LoU issued, there would be no
fraud. He didn't. Because he was expanding
his business too fast,and needed more and
more gems, without enough cash for these.
So,Shetty obligingly created even larger LoUs
with no margin money. used SWIFT. circum-
vented CBS, which were then presented to
the banks abroad for even more buyer's
credit to purchase the next consignment of
sparklers and pearls.
Over the years, each of the overseas bank
branches was presented larger and larger PNB-
originated LoUs.What were theoverseas man-
agers smoking? How come no one thought
something was amiss and kept e*tending
more buyer's credit without any serious cross-
checking? What about “abundant caution , a
term reverentially used by bankers?
Next, who did the internal audits, branch
audits, concurrent audits and statutory au-
dits? What kind ofaudits were these with
some Rs 11,400 crore slipping through the
cracks? Were PNB's board of directors and
audit committee sleeping on the watch?And
why were these accounts not reconciled and
squared up over seven years?
Now to the regulator. What about the
RBI’s audits -especially since the regulator
is keen on keeping close tabs on large value
nos tro accounts?
Finally, given its past record,with the CBI
taking over, should we at all expect to reach
any sensible resolution?
Throughout this scam, one inescapable
fact stares us in the face. The public sector
banking system has become rotten to the
core, and such banks are ripe for easy gam-
ing. But who cares, really?
Goswami,founder and chairperson of CERG
Advisory Private Limited, is author of
‘Corporate bankruptcy in India:A
comparative perspective‘
